# ESP8266-based-IoT-Weather-Station-using-MQTT
ESP8266 Microcontroller based IoT Weather station for based on the MQTT (Message Queue Telemetry Transport) Application Communication Layer Protocol. The Instrumentation components of this Weather station include a DHT11 Temperature/Humidity Sensor module, BMP180 Barometric Pressure/Altitude sensor. The MQTT Broker is available at http://broker.mqtt-dashboard.com (Port 1883) 


<b>ABSTRACT</b> :- 
A weather station can be defined an instrument consisting of different sensors which is used to measure and monitor the weather and atmospheric conditions in a certain area. A typical weather station consists of temperature, humidity, barometric pressure sensors, rain gauges, anenometers, soil moisture sensors, light intensity sensors, solar radiation sensors e.t.c. In this report, we discuss the development of an IOTBased Weather Station used to measure the temperature, humidity, and pressure of a certain environment where the weather conditions can be monitored from anywhere on the internet. The “heart” of this design is the low-cost NodeMCU ESP8266 WiFi-based microcontroller which is powered by a 3.3V power supply unit. The sensor nodes consist of a temperature and humidity sensor module (DHT11) and a barometric pressure sensor (BMP180). The readings obtained by the sensor are uploaded to the internet in real-time using the MQTT (Message Queue Telemetry Transport) application layer protocol. The MQTT protocol is used here because it is light-weight, faster and more reliable for resource constrained IOT devices. A smartphone or PC running an MQTT client is used to publish and subscribe to topics sent to the MQTT broker via the internet for effective monitoring from anywhere in the world. Furthermore, from the temperature, humidity and pressure readings, We can also compute other weather parameters such as the sea-level pressure, altitude, dew point, fog, Heat index e.t.c. All the codes for the project were written in the Arduino IDE and uploaded to the NodeMCU microcontroller. A weather station can be very helpful in obtaining localized weather forecasts and data, which can help in planning our daily activities. It can also help farmers and agricultural producers to properly plan for planting and harvesting periods. The design can be further developed to incorporate more sensors and also use an OLED display to display real-time readings. A control section can also be incorporated in this weather station to perform control and automation purposes.
KEYWORDS :- Weather station, DHT11 (Temperature and humidity sensor), BMP180 (Pressure sensor), MQTT, IOT, NodeMCU, Arduino IDE.
